Justifying his decision to not hastily open up the restrictions to contain the spread of Covid-19, Maharashtra chief minister Uddhav Thackeray asked if those demanding lifting of the lockdown would take responsibility for the fatalities.
Thackeray has been criticised for treading cautiously on lifting the curbs in Maharashtra. It is also said that Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar intervened to convince him to allow opening up of businesses and industry. In a clear indication that the lockdown could continue after July 31, Thackeray said the government would provide further relaxations in activities.
In part one of the two-part interview to Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut for Sena mouthpiece Saamana, Thackeray said living with coronavirus is a tightrope walk that requires balancing the economy and health of the public. He also warned against lifting of lockdown at once, citing several countries have reimposed lockdowns after lifting them all at once. 
“There are several smart people speaking against the lockdown... Fine, we will open everything for you, but if, unfortunately, people die due to this, will you take the responsibility for it? There is no problem in opening up, but will they take responsibility? I am not using the word ‘lockdown’ now. I will not say that I am lifting the lockdown, but gradually restrictions are being lifted. And my attempt is that once an activity is opened, there should be no need to shut it again,” he said.
“Just thinking about the economy too will not work. Those who are only concerned about the health situation, however grave it may be, too, will have to think a little about the economy. Living with the coronavirus is a tightrope walk,” Thackeray said.
In the interview published in Saamana on Saturday, Thackeray spoke about various topics, including the first six months of his government, the role of Opposition leader, the government’s measures to tackle Covid-19, and his view on final-year examinations, among others.
Saying that people were tired of sitting at home, Raut asked Thackeray when will vada pav, a popular snack in Mumbai, be available and when will the suburban train network resume for common man.
“People may be bored [of the lockdown], but we can’t lift restrictions to give them a break from it. If we hastily unlock, and someone loses their life, then what is the use of livelihood? What will happen if this virus spreads in a factory? Then we must decide that no matter how many people succumb to this disease, we do not want a lockdown. Are you prepared for it? I am not. I am not [Donald] Trump, I can’t see my people suffer in front of my eyes… We will start [suburban] local trains and vada pav [stalls on the roads], but first, decide on one extreme. Families are falling ill and dying. Who will open the lockdown in that family,” he asked.
Thackeray also remained measured in the success of containing the spread of Covid-19 in Dharavi, India’s largest slum, and in acknowledging the reducing numbers from Mumbai. “I am not going to speak about it. The danger has still not passed. If I appreciate the work now, complacency may creep in.” The ‘Dharavi model’ was praised by the World Health Organization (WHO).
The chief minister also took potshots at former chief minister and leader of Opposition in the legislative Assembly Devendra Fadnavis. The former chief minister is touring the state to review the Covid-19 situation and criticising the government on its shortcomings. He also visited Delhi earlier this week. 
Thackeray said, “He [Fadnavis] must have gone to see the Covid-19 situation there, but he did not say anything about the situation there. He is going to Delhi because he has given Maharashtra’s fund to Delhi (Centre).”
Thackeray said that Fadnavis might have “stomach ache” after an organisation ranked Thackeray as one of the best chief ministers in India. “He could have a stomach ache because without stepping out anywhere, one organisation ranked me as [one of the] best chief ministers in the country. This must be a cause of stomach cramps because corona has varied symptoms.”
Thackeray dismissed the criticism that he has not gone to Mantralaya as much as he should have. He said that he is using technology to take stock of the situation in the state. “Mantralaya is shut now. The technology has advanced to such an extent... If one cannot use technology, then it is really unfortunate. I am meeting officials and public representatives. In one go, I am covering the entire state and taking decisions. If it is important to visit physically, you go to that place, but with video-conferencing, you can cover the state,” he said.
The chief minister also remained firm on the state’s decision to not hold final-year examinations, while giving an option to appear for exams after the Covid crisis goes away. “We have taken a decision. I think now the Governor too has understood [it]. Nobody is against the idea of holding exams. I am in favour, but understand there is an option for students to accept the grades based on average of previous semesters or appear for exams. We do not know yet when these exams can be held,” he said.
The Sena chief also dodged a question on Pawar’s comments on Ram Mandir being a priority over tackling Covid-19 for the Centre. The CM said this is not “Thackeray sarkar”, but “everybody’s sarkar, especially that of the people of the state, who have accepted this experiment.” “I am not bothered about the political challenges. People have faith in me,” he said.
The Delhi University’s St. Stephen’s College will be charging a penalty of Rs 100 per day from hostellers who will not vacate their rooms till August 7, a move that has upset many students.
 Students are unhappy with the latest notice and said it is “unfair” to them especially at this time when they are stuck in their home towns.
 According to college principal John Varghese, the students have been sent repeated reminders since the beginning of July and the college has to “fumigate” and “sanitise” the rooms for the students who will be coming after the new session begins.
 “Considering the ongoing pandemic, and the many requests submitted by the resident junior members, students who are unable to vacate their rooms will be allowed to retain their rooms with a modest room rent charge of Rs 100 per day starting from August 7, 2020,” a notice posted on the college website said.
 “Resident Junior members are also hereby notified that, if and when the government gives the permission to reopen the residence facilities, all belongings and luggage will be moved a week prior to the date of residence reopening to facilitate necessary cleaning and renovations. In such occasion, the college will not be responsible for loss or damages,” the notice added.
 Prior to this, another notice was issued to the students on June 23 asking them to vacate their rooms.
 A hosteller, who is currently in West Bengal, said the college is being “unfair” and is charging almost double the amount of what they would usually pay for the room.
 He left Delhi for his home town two days prior to March 9, when the mid-semester break started.
 The mid-semester break was till March 15 but before that the Delhi University announced that it would be closed in view of the coronavirus pandemic.
 “Subsequently, the lockdown was announced and we were unable to come back to Delhi. Even in the current situation, it is not safe to travel. Students are stuck in northeast and far off places and won’t be able to come back in time to collect their belongings. We usually pay Rs 1,400 as the room rent but going by the current rate, we will end up paying Rs 3,000 for a month,” the student said on the condition of anonymity.
He said that students have been provided the option to authorise their local guardians to collect their belongings but that is also not possible since the keys of the rooms are with the hostellers.
 Another hosteller, who is stuck in Kashmir, cited the issue of unsafe travel during the pandemic and said that he has written to the dean (residence) but their has been no solution to the issue.
 “There are some students who live nearby Delhi and could travel by car and collect their belongings. But my local guardian lives in a containment zone and won’t be able to travel in such a situation. It is unfair during this time,” he said.
 The college principal said that a section of students is circulating “misinformation”.
 “By the time the lockdown happened, a lot of the students had gone for the mid-semester break. Since the lockdown happened, they didn’t come back. Nobody is talking about the fact that the college is not charging them from the period from the time they were not here till August 7. They have not been charged a single paise for the period they were not here,” Varghese told PTI.
 He said there were a few students who were there till June 30 and they would be charged only for the time they were here which means they won’t be charged for July.
 “We have admissions and we have to get ready for the fresh set of students and in our hostels, applications are made every year. So we have to get ready the rooms, carry out repairs, fumigation, sanitisation and then get rooms for the fresh set of students, who will come, but we don’t know when,” he added.
 “Unless the things are removed, we cannot carry out either repairs or sanitisation,” he said, adding that the dean (residence) has been telling all of them to remove their belongings and in case they are unable to come, they can authorise a friend or a relative in Delhi to come and remove their stuff.
 Many of the students have done that, the college principal said.
 From July onwards, regular notices and information have been going to the students and they have been given a deadline till August 7.
 “Now the lockdown has been opened up and there is no restriction on travel. What is preventing them? That will be true (about restrictions in certain places) but they are in direct communication with dean’s office and they have been asked to authorise someone here. I don’t think a big number of students have their belongings still kept here,” the college principal said.
 Varghese said that what they are being asked to pay is not a “rent” but a “penalty”.
 “You deposit a luggage in an airport or railway station’s cloak room and you are charged by the hour. But we have to be fair and we have to prepare for the students who are coming,” he said.
 In the current scenario, the process of sanitisation and cleaning is going to be a longer process, Varghese said.
 He added that there are “certain procedures” that can be followed if the students have taken the keys with them and they are aware about the process. 
India and China are set to hold a fresh round of high-level military talks next week to work out modalities for withdrawal of Chinese troops from Pangong Tso area in eastern Ladakh, government sources said on Saturday.
So far, senior military commanders of the two armies have held four rounds of talks on disengagement of troops from the friction points in eastern Ladakh with an aim to restore peace and tranquillity in the region.
The sources said the ongoing engagement and dialogue at military and diplomatic levels have resulted in complete disengagement of troops at patrolling point 14, 15 and 17 A in eastern Ladakh.
“A meeting between senior military commanders of the two armies is expected in the coming week to further work out modalities of Pangong Tso lake area,” said a source.
People familiar with the developments said Chinese military has pulled back from Galwan Valley and certain other friction points but the withdrawal of troops has not moved forward from Finger 5 to Finger 8 in Pangong Tso area as demanded by India.
On Friday, the two sides held another round of diplomatic talks on the border issue.   After the talks, the Ministry of External Affairs said both sides agreed that an early and complete disengagement of the troops along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in accordance with bilateral agreement and protocols was essential for overall development of bilateral relations.
The people familiar with the developments said India conveyed a firm message to the Chinese side that it has to implement the disengagement process as agreed to during the four rounds of Corps Commander-level talks between the two militaries.
National Security Advisor Ajit Doval and Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi held a nearly two-hour-long telephonic conversation on July 5 to bring down tension in the region.   Both sides commenced the disengagement process from July 6 following talks between Doval and Wang who are Special Representatives for the boundary question.
After the fourth round of Corps Commander-level talks, the Army said both sides are committed to “complete disengagement” of troops, adding the process is “intricate” and it requires “constant verification”.
During a visit to eastern Ladakh last week, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said progress has been made in the ongoing talks with China to find a solution to the border standoff but he cannot guarantee to what extent it would be resolved.
The tension in eastern Ladakh escalated manifold after the violent clashes in Galwan Valley on June 15 in which 20 Indian Army personnel were killed.   The Chinese side also suffered casualties but it is yet to give out the details. According to an American intelligence report, the number of casualties on the Chinese side was 35.
 After the last round of military talks, government sources said the Indian side conveyed a “very clear” message to the Chinese army that status quo ante must be restored in eastern Ladakh and it will have to follow all mutually agreed protocols for border management to bring back peace and tranquillity.
 Government sources said India is keeping a hawk eye vigil on all areas along the LAC in Ladakh and will maintain a high-level of alertness to deal with any eventualities. PTI MPB GSN  ZMN
India and China are set to hold a fresh round of high-level military talks next week to work out modalities for withdrawal of Chinese troops from Pangong Tso area in eastern Ladakh, government sources said on Saturday.
So far, senior military commanders of the two armies have held four rounds of talks on disengagement of troops from the friction points in eastern Ladakh with an aim to restore peace and tranquillity in the region.
The sources said the ongoing engagement and dialogue at military and diplomatic levels have resulted in complete disengagement of troops at patrolling point 14, 15 and 17 A in eastern Ladakh.
“A meeting between senior military commanders of the two armies is expected in the coming week to further work out modalities of Pangong Tso lake area,” said a source.
People familiar with the developments said Chinese military has pulled back from Galwan Valley and certain other friction points but the withdrawal of troops has not moved forward from Finger 5 to Finger 8 in Pangong Tso area as demanded by India.
On Friday, the two sides held another round of diplomatic talks on the border issue.   After the talks, the Ministry of External Affairs said both sides agreed that an early and complete disengagement of the troops along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in accordance with bilateral agreement and protocols was essential for overall development of bilateral relations.
The people familiar with the developments said India conveyed a firm message to the Chinese side that it has to implement the disengagement process as agreed to during the four rounds of Corps Commander-level talks between the two militaries.
National Security Advisor Ajit Doval and Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi held a nearly two-hour-long telephonic conversation on July 5 to bring down tension in the region.   Both sides commenced the disengagement process from July 6 following talks between Doval and Wang who are Special Representatives for the boundary question.
After the fourth round of Corps Commander-level talks, the Army said both sides are committed to “complete disengagement” of troops, adding the process is “intricate” and it requires “constant verification”.
During a visit to eastern Ladakh last week, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said progress has been made in the ongoing talks with China to find a solution to the border standoff but he cannot guarantee to what extent it would be resolved.
The tension in eastern Ladakh escalated manifold after the violent clashes in Galwan Valley on June 15 in which 20 Indian Army personnel were killed.   The Chinese side also suffered casualties but it is yet to give out the details. According to an American intelligence report, the number of casualties on the Chinese side was 35.
 After the last round of military talks, government sources said the Indian side conveyed a “very clear” message to the Chinese army that status quo ante must be restored in eastern Ladakh and it will have to follow all mutually agreed protocols for border management to bring back peace and tranquillity.
 Government sources said India is keeping a hawk eye vigil on all areas along the LAC in Ladakh and will maintain a high-level of alertness to deal with any eventualities. PTI MPB GSN  ZMN
 Officers from crime branch’s unit 3 on Friday busted a gang and arrested its four members for making fake e-passes and medical certificates to travel within the state from Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR) during the lockdown. 
According to the police, the accused would charge ₹3,000 for a fake pass or medical certificate, which is mandatory for every citizen for travel to another other city or state during the lockdown. 
The accused have been identified as Sindhudurg resident Abdul Karim Mohammad Shaikh alias Aslam, 35; Girgaum residents Samir Shamsuddin Shaikh, 36; and Noor Mohammad Abdul Gani Shaikh, 39; and Vasai resident Vinay Mohan Pate, 36. Shaikh, Samir and Noor run a travel company in Mumbai, while Pate runs a computer class in Vasai. 
The police received a tip-off about a gang which had been duping citizens who had to travel to other districts in the state from MMR. During inquiry, the police discovered that the accused were operational from Malvan and would send the e-passes from there to citizens on WhatsApp or email. The numbers of their mobile phones were registered on Delhi addresses. 
“Based on the tip-off, an officer approached Shaikh posing as a customer and asked for a police e-pass to travel to Satara from Mumbai. The documents were sent on WhatsApp,” said senior inspector Ashok Khot of unit 3. 
After receiving the pass, a police team visited Malvan and arrested the Shaikh Samir and Noor from there, while Pate was arrested from his home in Vasai. 
The police also seized the laptop, mobile phones and several fake e-passes from the accused. 
“It appears that someone in authority may have also helped the gang. We are probing further,” said police inspector Nitin Patil. 
The four were produced in a local court and remanded in police custody till Monday.
The Indian Air Force (IAF) choppers on Saturday carried out relief operations in three worst affected districts—Darbhanga, Gopalganj and East Champaran — by dropping food packets among marooned people, as the deluge from Gandak and other rivers continued to engulf fresh areas after breaching the safety embankments.
As of Friday, 10 people have lost their lives in current spell of floods – seven people lost their lives at West Champaran, two died in Sitamarhi and one in Darbhanga. 
The overflowing Gandak has washed away the approach road to Dumariaghat bridge on the national highway 28, connecting East Champaran and Gopalganj, snapping the traffic on the road that connects New Delhi with Assam. NHAI officials are carrying out the restoration work on a war footing to resume the traffic on the NH, which is also East West Corridor. The state government said repair work of breached embankments would resume only after two-three days, during which the downpour is expected to become less intense. 
Also read | Bihar flood: Gandak river breaches embankment in Champaran, several villages inundated; 2000 rescued
The floodwater from Gandak has engulfed dozens of more villages of Baikunthpur block of Gopalganj after it breached the western embankment near Dewapur on wee hours of Friday. Flood situation remain grim in East Champaran as well, as dozens of village of Kesaria and Sangrampur block came under heavy sheet of water.
Kamla and Bagmati rivers, which are flowing above the danger mark at various places across its course, have over topped the safety embankments in Darbhanga and inundated low-lying areas and residential colonies near the embankments. Vehicular traffic on Darbhanga-Jainagar road has been suspended, as floodwaters have overtopped it at many places.
Almost a million residing in over 900 panchayats of 74 blocks of 10 districts have been hit due to the floods, partially or wholly. More than 93,000 people have been rescued across the districts by 22 teams of the national disaster response force (NDRF) and state disaster response force (SDRF) in the last one week, according to the disaster management department (DMD).
The train services on Sugauli-Narkatiaganj section have been suspended after the floodwater had touched the girder of a bridge in the route resulting in termination of Delhi-Bapudham Motihari Champaran Satyagrah Express special train, starting from Saturday from Delhi at Bettiah instead of Bapudham Motihari. The train will depart from Bettiah till the flood situation improves, said chief public relation officer of ECR Rajesh Kumar.
Also read | Help families affected by Assam, Bihar floods: Sachin Pilot
Deputy chief minister Sushil Modi said that each flood-affected people would be given Rs 6,000 each as relief from the government. “Compensation for loss of standing crops would be announced after the assessment. Farmers would be provided seeds for alternative crops to offset the losses,” Modi said.
Besides the three major districts like Gopalganj, East Champaran and Darbhanga, Sitamarhi, Sheohar, Supaul, Kisanganj, Muzaffapur, West Champaran and Khagaria are also facing the devastation due to floods of various scales.
Flood situation in north Bihar areas is expected to aggravate further as the Patna Meteorological Centre has predicted heavy rains accompanied with thunderstorm and lightning across all 38 districts of Bihar on July 27 and 28. Weathermen attributed the shifting of monsoon trough towards the foothills of the Himalayas reason behind enhanced rain activities in coming days.
Meteorologist Ravindra Kumar said, “Bihar is likely to receive heavy rains after July 26. Widespread rain with greater intensity is likely to hit entire Bihar on July 27 and 28. A yellow category warning for heavy to very heavy rain coupled with thunderstorm and lightning has been issued for North Bihar and several parts of south-western districts.”
NEW DELHI  
Northern Army commander Lieutenant General YK Joshi on Saturday said that disengagement between Indian and Chinese soldiers deployed in forward positions at flashpoints along the contested Line of Actual Control (LAC) between the two countries was a complex and intricate process that required diligent execution -- indicating that the situation along the LAC in Eastern Ladkh hasn’t returned to normal. 
Joshi told news channels that the army would continue all efforts to restore status quo ante (the situation as it existed in early April) along the LAC. India matched a build-up by the Chinese in the area, starting early May, and matters came to a head on June 15 when Indian and Chinese soldiers clashed , leaving 20 Indian soldiers and an unknown number of Chinese ones dead. 
India and China have lately failed to make a breakthrough in reducing border tensions despite intense negotiations at the military and diplomatic levels, and the disengagement process at some points has virtually stopped, according to people aware of the developments. HT reported last week, citing people familiar with the matter, that the two armies have amassed almost 100,000 soldiers in their forward and depth areas. 
Joshi’s comments came a day after the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination (WMCC) on India-China border affairs reviewed the situation in the border areas and the disengagement process in the western sector of the LAC.
At the meeting, the two sides agreed that another meeting of corps commanders “may be held soon so as to work out further steps to ensure expeditiously complete disengagement and de-escalation” along the LAC, the ministry of external affairs said in a statement on Friday.
The meeting is expected to be held next week but no dates have been finalised yet. 
Joshi said disengagement was initiated after four rounds of talks between senior Indian and Chinese military commanders, and it was being verified on the ground to “ensure its veracity and correctness.” He said de-escalation of the border conflict would begin after achieving complete disengagement.
The ground situation remains unchanged in the Ladakh sector where both armies have amassed almost 100,000 soldiers in their forward and depth areas.
During a visit to Ladakh on July 17, defence minister Rajnath Singh indicated that the negotiations to resolve military tensions along the LAC were complex. He said progress in negotiations should help resolve the border dispute but added that he “couldn’t guarantee to what extent the situation will be resolved.” 
On Wednesday, Singh asked the Indian Air Force to stay prepared for any eventuality.
The disengagement process has barely made progress after the last round of meeting between senior Indian and Chinese commanders on July 14. 

The Rajasthan government has addressed governor Kalraj Mishra’s queries on the urgent need for holding a special session of the assembly and requested him to convene the House on July 31, Congress functionaries aware of the developments said on Saturday, a day after legislators supporting chief minister Ashok Gehlot staged a five-hour demonstration at Raj Bhavan to push for their demand for a special sitting. 
Raising the pitch in the midst of a political crisis, Gehlot told MLAs at a Congress Legislature Party (CLP) meeting that he was ready to knock at the doors of the President’s House and protest outside the Prime Minister’s residence in the national capital to defeat the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)’s “conspiracy” to topple his government, according to the Congress functionaries who did not want to named. 
A letter by the Congress sent to Mishra stressed that the governor had to go by the aid and advice of the council of ministers on convening, proroguing or dissolving the House and that he cannot dictate procedures of the House, which was in the domain of the speaker, said the people aware of the developments. 
Mishra was yet to take a final call on convening the session till late Saturday night. Officials in his office, who did not want to be named, said a “considered” view was being taken on the fresh proposal and a decision will be announced at an “appropriate” time. 
“The fresh proposal has been prepared with keeping legalities and provisions in mind, and approved by the cabinet before it was sent to Raj Bhavan,” a minister in the Gehlot government said, a day after Mishra sought to know the emergency for summoning the session and its agenda. 
Facing protests by legislators backing Gehlot, Mishra, who was in the BJP before becoming the governor, also asked why the chief minister was pushing for a floor test even though no one had put forth such a demand and how the government was planning to protect the MLAs in the backdrop of the Covid-19 outbreak. 
“We have proposed calling the session from July 31, giving sufficient time for MLAs to reach and attend the assembly. The governor is also informed of the important bills and business to be tabled in house,” the minister quoted above said. He added that the Rajasthan Epidemic Diseases Ordinance 2020, notified in May for strict enforcement of Covid-19 restrictions, also needed to be tabled in the House. 
Rajasthan is facing a political crisis due to a rebellion by former deputy chief minister Sachin Pilot and a section of legislators backing him. The Gehlot camp, which is confident of its numbers and feels a floor test may be its best bet to end the political crisis, says the governor is delaying convening a session due to pressure from the BJP-led central government. Mishra denies the charge and says he will follow constitutional norms to convene the House. 
“He had queries. We have replied to them,” a second minister. The proposal has been submitted after consultation with the speaker, he said. 
The draft proposal was prepared at a cabinet meeting that began at 10pm on Friday night and stretched to 1am, Congress functionaries said. It was finalised at another cabinet meeting later on Saturday. 
According to the law laid down by the Supreme Court, the governor notifies the holding of a session on the recommendation of the council of ministers. 
Former Chief Justice of India P Sathasivam said normally, as per the Constitution, the advice of the council of ministers is binding on the governor, but when there is a dispute about issues such as the number of lawmakers supporting a chief minister, then it is a special case. 
“The governor can exercise his discretion. He can then summon MLAs to Raj Bhavan [governor’s house], make inquiries, and have discussions with various MLA groups, etc. So the general rule that the governor is bound by aid and advice of the council of ministers might not be relevant in the Rajasthan matter,” said Sathasivam, who has also served as Kerala governor. 
Earlier in the day, a CLP meeting was held at a luxury hotel on the Jaipur-Delhi highway, where MLAs backing Gehlot have been camping since July 13. “We will not let the BJP conspiracy to succeed. If required, we will go to the Rashtrapati Bhavan and stage dharna; if necessary, we will protest outside the PM’s house,” a senior Congress leader quoted CM Gehlot as saying. “This fight is to save democracy.” 
Congress general secretary Avinash Pande said the high command made efforts so that members can freely talk about issues if they had complaints. “...but unfortunately, they became puppet in the hands of BJP and I don’t think that there return is possible from there,” he said, apparently referring to the Pilot camp. 
Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala praised the “unity and collectiveness” shown by the MLAs at Friday’s demonstration. “...in the future, it will be remembered how 102 people together defeated those who were trying to crush the Constitution,” he said. 
The BJP denies the Congress’s claim that it is behind the Rajasthan turmoil and says the crisis was triggered by an internal feud in the Congress. Pilot, for his part, says he has no plans of joining the BJP. 
Gehlot has the support of 101 members (though this does not include speaker CP Joshi). Pilot has 18 other Congress MLAs and three independents in his camp, taking his tally to 22. The BJP and its ally Rashtriya Loktrantrik Party have 75 seats. Bhanwarlal Meghwal, one Congress MLA said to be close to Pilot, is indisposed. If Pilot’s tally is added to that of the opposition alliance, it takes their number up to 97. A three-member swing from the Gehlot camp to the Pilot camp or to the BJP could lead to the government falling in the event of a floor test. 
Meanwhile, a delegation of 15 BJP leaders, including state party president Satish Poonia and MLAs from Jaipur City, met the governor in the evening and expressed displeasure at chief minister Gehlot’s Friday remarks that the people of the state could gherao Raj Bhavan if the Mishra did not convene a session.
“The pressure on the governor to get a decision in their favour is a derogatory attempt to threaten constitutional institutions,” they said in a memorandum that was shared with the media.
The Amboli police on Friday arrested a 45-year-old jeweller from Bhopal in Madhya Pradesh for allegedly raping a 28-year-old model in Andheri (West). 
According to police, the accused Rahul Agarwal works at a jewellery store in Bhopal, and had come to Mumbai to meet the victim to finalise on the jewellery pieces. He visited her at her Andheri apartment where he sexually assaulted her.
On July 12, the victim had visited Bhopal. During her visit she came across a jewellery store from where she purchased a set of earrings. She met Agrawal at the store and later kept in touch with through phone calls, said the woman in her complaint
The woman claimed that she was from Delhi and was staying at her friend’s flat in Andheri, as she was looking for an opportunity in the film industry. She told police that her friends had liked the earrings she had bought from Bhopal, and they wanted to purchase too. 
Hence, she contacted Agarwal and invited him to come with samples. On July 23, he visited victim’s residence and sexually assaulted her. He even threatened her against filing a complaint. 
Someshwar Kamthe, senior inspector from Amboli police station said, “Following the victim’s complaint we registered the case under sections 376 (punishment for rape) and 506 (punishment for criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code and arrested him on Friday.” He is remanded in police custody till July 28.
New Delhi: About 420,000 Covid-19 tests were conducted in India in a day, officials said on Saturday, nearly double the daily testing capacity of 220,000 at the beginning of the month.
As many as 16 million tests have been conducted in India until now, according to the Union health ministry’s data. Last week, about 350,000 samples were tested daily on average.
With the third-highest Covid-19 cases globally, the increased testing has taken India’s tests per million to 11,485, according to the data. This is much lower compared to the US (158,981 tests per million) and just about half of Brazil’s 23,094. The US and Brazil are the two worst-hit countries by the pandemic.
India had one Covid-19 testing lab in January – Pune’s National Institute of Virology. The number has now gone up to 1,301 labs. Of these, 902 are government and 399 private labs.
The Centre has advised the states and Union territories to keep up the “test, track and treat” strategy. “Aggressive testing may lead to a higher number of daily positive cases initially but would eventually achieve a decline as has been demonstrated after Union Government’s targeted efforts in the NCT [National Capital Territory] of Delhi,” a government press release said.
The number of daily cases in Delhi went up to nearly 4,000 in June after the government scaled up testing with the rapid antigen kits.
Dr Puneet Misra, a community medicine professor at New Delhi’s All India Institute of Medical Sciences, said increased testing will also help keep the mortality low. “If cases are detected early, they can receive requisite treatment early. This also helps doctors in monitoring patients who might be at a higher risk of death such as the old, those with compromised immune systems, those who might have diabetes, hypertension, cancer, heart, and kidney disease.” Misra said many have questioned antigen testing missing some positive cases. “But from what we have seen in Delhi, the high number of tests ensured that those who needed to be admitted reached hospitals early.”
India has seen a steady decline in the number of Covid-19 deaths. With 31,358 deaths till Saturday, the case fatality rate stood at 2.35%. It is one of the lowest globally, the press release said.
According to the health ministry data, the recovery rate has also gone up to 63.5%. In the last 24 hours, 32,223 patients recovered from the infection, increasing the gap between the number of patients, who have recovered so far and the number of active cases or those living with the infection, to 393,360, it added.
New Delhi: Barring a last-minute change of mind, the Narendra Modi government is unlikely to allow the reopening of schools in the next phase of easing of restrictions that is expected next week, according to top officials involved in the discussions related to this. 
The officials, who asked not to be named added that metro rail services too may not start soon while gymnasium and swimming pools might also remain out of bounds, as part of the measures to check the further spread of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) pandemic. 
After a 68 day hard lockdown ended on may 31, the government has announced two phases it termed Unlock 1.0 and Unlock 2.0, in June and July respectively. Each phase has allowed more activities across domains -- in an effort to revive economic activity, and return to a semblance of normalcy. 
To be sure, most activities have been allowed only outside so-called containment zones where there are still clusters of infections. And states have been allowed the freedom to impose restrictions again if they feel the need to. India continues to see the number of Covid-19 cases rise. It added 48,458 cases on Saturday to take its total case tally to 1,383,959. 
The HRD ministry on Monday began consultation with states and other stakeholders on reopening of schools which have been closed since March due to the  pandemic. In the meeting chaired by the Secretary, School Education, Anita Karwal,  state education secretaries also deliberated upon health and safety of students, hygiene measures in schools and issues regarding online and digital education. 
Union HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’ said in June that  suggestions would be sought from parents on schools repoening, which would be examined and sent to the health ministry and ministry of home affairs. 
After an extensive consultation, the HRD ministry has conveyed to the Centre’s Covid-19 sitaution  managers that many parents don’t favour reopening of schools at this stage. “HRD ministry told us that many parents have even requested that schools be opened only after the vaccine is developed,” said one of the officials cited above.  India will start the trial of the Oxford-Astra Zeneca vaccine next month and top official are hopeful that if the trials are successful, the vaccine can be rolled out by December. 
“We need to be very careful about schools because children’s health is of paramount importance,” said a second official. 
HT also learns that while there is a recognition that metro services will help the situation return to normal, it still comes with attendant risks, especially  in  cities such as Delhi, Kolkata and Bangalore.  Suburban train services have been operational in Mumbai since June 15, although they are meant only for workers providing essential services. 
Large congregation, which have  been banned from the beginning of the lockdown, may continue to be prohibited. The government has already decided to celebrate Independence Day with such restrictions in place and even the At Home at Rashtrapati Bhawan on the afternoon of Independence Day is being scaled down significantly. 
On Friday, cabinet secretary Rajiv Gauba told nine states at a special review meeting that two to three-day lockdowns alone are not enough to slow the spread of the disease -- some states have started imposing such lockdowns --  and pointed out while some states have demonstrated “the situation can be turned around” others have “showed how it can deteriorate”. 
In a significant development, troops of India and China have completed disengagement at Galwan Valley, Patrolling Point 15, and Hot Springs/Gogra area in Eastern Ladakh amid the ongoing talks at the diplomatic and military level, sources said.
“The ongoing engagement and dialogue between India and China at the military and diplomatic levels has resulted in complete disengagement at Patrolling Point 14 (Galwan area), 15 and 17 A (Hot Springs/Gogra) in eastern Ladakh,” a source told ANI here.
The sources said that after disengagement in these areas as per agreements in the last Corps Commander-level talks, the only area where disengagement is left to be implemented is the Finger area along the Pangong Tso lake.
A meeting between the senior military commanders is expected in the coming week to further work out modalities of the Pangong Tso lake area, they added.
Also read | A timeline: India-China’s deadliest border clash since 1975 explained
Even though disengagement has been taking place between the two sides, the Chinese have not begun the process of de-escalation along the LAC opposite Eastern Ladakh where they have maintained a build-up of close to 40,000 troops with heavy weaponry deployed in front and depth areas.
India has made it clear that for the situation to be normalized, the Chinese will have to completely deescalate and move back troops to their permanent locations.
India and China had reviewed the situation on Friday in the India-China border areas at the 17th meeting of the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination (WMCC) and agreed that early and complete disengagement of the troops along the Line of Actual Control (LAC), de-escalation from India-China border areas and full restoration of peace and tranquillity was essential for the smooth overall development of bilateral relations.
They also agreed that another meeting of senior commanders may be held soon so as to work out further steps to ensure expeditiously complete disengagement and de-escalation.
The Indian delegation was led by Joint Secretary (East Asia) in the External Affairs Ministry and Director General of Boundary and Oceanic Dept of Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs led the Chinese delegation.
Also read: The Galwan Valley face-off explained through 17 news reports
An External Affairs Ministry release had said that the two sides reviewed the situation in the India-China border areas and the ongoing disengagement process along the Line of Actual Control (LAC )in the Western Sector.
“They agreed that early and complete disengagement of the troops along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) and de-escalation from India-China border areas in accordance with bilateral agreement and protocols and full restoration of peace and tranquillity was essential for the smooth overall development of bilateral relations,” the release said.
The two sides noted that this was in accordance with the agreement reached between the two Special Representatives (SRs) during their telephonic conversation on July 5, 2020.
The two countries have held military and diplomatic consultations following a face-off between troops of two sides in Eastern Ladakh and the military build-up by China.
WMCC was established in 2012 as an institutional mechanism for consultation and coordination for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity in the India-China border areas, as well as to exchange views on strengthening communication and cooperation, including between their border security personnel. 
New Delhi: The Delhi police have booked a Jawaharlal Nehru University research scholar for allegedly trying to “provoke riots and breach of peace” through his tweets against Indian Army. 
In the FIR registered at Kapashera police station on July 8, Sajid Bin Sayed has been booked under Indian Penal code section 153 (provocation with intent to cause a riot) and 504 (intentionally insulting with intent to provoke breach of the peace).
Deputy commissioner of police (southwest) Devender Arya said a case has been registered based on the complaint and further probe is underway.
When contacted, Sajid said he was not aware of the case against him. “I haven’t received any official information from the police and got to know about the FIR through media reports. Criticising policies is a part of democracy and it is my constitutional right and that is what I did,” said the final-year PhD student.
The FIR, police said, was registered on the basis of a complaint given by one Tejinder Yadav, a resident of Kapashera. In the FIR, Yadav, who has introduced himself as a social worker, has alleged that Sayed has termed Indian Army’s anti-terrorist operations in Kashmir as wrong and against the country. 
New Delhi: An 18-year-old man drowned in a pit filled with rainwater in southeast Delhi’s Jasola on Wednesday. Police said the pit was dug up for an ongoing construction work in the area. Police are yet to verify which agency was involved. 
Quoting eyewitnesses, a police officer said the man drowned while trying to save two children who were playing in rainwater near the pit. Police identified the dead teenager as Mohammad Aamir,18, a resident of Khadda colony near Jasola Vihar. His father is a tailor.
According to the police, around 4.30 pm Wednesday they received a call reporting that a man has drowned in a pit dug up in Jasola. A police team reached the spot and pulled out the body with the help of fire personnel and local residents. The body was sent for a post-mortem examination and was later handed over to Aamir’s family, police said.
“During preliminary probe, witnesses said the streets in Jasola were waterlogged after the rain on Wednesday. Two boys who were accompanying Aamir had fallen into the pit. Aamir fell into the pit while trying to rescue the two kids. Though he safely pulled the two children out, he drowned,” said the officer.
Deputy commissioner of police (south east) RP Meena said police have registered a case under section 304 A (causing death due to negligence) of the Indian Penal Code. Meena said police are probing whose negligence led to the death. 
This is the third rain-related death in Delhi in the past one week. On July 19, a 56-year-old man had drowned in the waterlogged Minto Road underpass near Connaught Place. The same day, a 28-year-old man died afer falling in a waterlogged street in Amar Colony. 
New Delhi: A Delhi court has granted bail to an accused in a case related to February’s communal riots in north-east Delhi. The same court denied release to another accused in a separate riots case which took place in Bhajanpura. In a third case, the court allowed the release of two persons — Furqan and Irshad — who were arrested for damaging the Rajdhani school during the riots, after the city police informed court that nothing adverse was found against them in the investigation. 
All three cases were decided on Friday(July 24). 
Police had filed a cancellation report, specifying that accused persons did not cause any damage to Rajdhani School and they may be discharged. It had said that there is no material on record to connect the accused persons with the crime. 
Chief metropolitan magistrate Purshottam Pathak granted bail to Mukesh Rai while stating that police had not recovered anything from him and the chargesheet has already been filed. The judge said that the accused has been in jail since the last three months and no purpose would be served by keeping Rai in judicial custody further. 
Police had said that Rai was a part of an unlawful assembly and was involved in rioting, vandalisation, chanting of slogans against the other community, looting of shops and arson of public as well as private properties during the riots in February. 
Rai’s counsel had said that he was being falsely implicated and no recovery has been made from him. 
The judge while granting bail, noted that Rai was arrested on the basis of the disclosure statement of another accused and nothing has been recovered from him. 
In a separate case, judge Pathak denied bail to Neeraj alias Kashi while noting that he was a part of an unlawful assembly and had further involved in rioting and burning of shops. The court also said that the accused was a “habitual offender”. 
The judge said that the investigating officer had filed the records of previous criminal antecendents and has also been identified by a Delhi police head constable for being present on the spot at the time of the incident of rioting. 
Neeraj, through his cousnel, had contended that he is the sole bread earner of his family and his wife being seven-month pregnant, he should be granted bail. He said that the charge sheet in the present case has already been filed and hence he should be released on bail. 
However, the police had contended that he had actively participated in the riots and ransacked houses and shops. 
Communal riots had broken out in the city on February 23, claiming 53 lives and leaving several injured. 
New Delhi: It’s been a long wait , but finally, the Consumer Protection Act of 2019 has replaced the 1986 law and it’s certainly a cause for celebration. 
The new law retains all the components of the landmark 1986 law that gave Indian consumers, their six basic rights and a consumer justice system. However, it further expands the scope of the consumer courts to deal with complaints pertaining to e-commerce, direct selling entities and unfair contracts. It also provides for product liability action against manufacturers, sellers and service providers for any defects or deficiencies or even failure to provide adequate warning about the use of the product or service. 
The new law is in tune with the modern day concepts of consumer protection, the new market dynamics and the rapid advances in digital technology that has so transformed our world. In fact the comprehensive E-commerce Rules notified under the new law to protect consumers from unfair trade practices in the digital world, encompasses all models of e-commerce and all kinds of unfair trade practices.
But what makes this law so different and comprehensive is the fact that under the new law , the government takes full responsibility for the protection, promotion and enforcement of consumer rights, through the creation of the regulatory body- the Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA). Even though the 1986 law encapsulated the rights of consumers, it failed to provide a regulator to enforce all the rights, particularly the right to be protected from unsafe goods and services and unfair trade practices, believing that the consumer court or the adjudicatory body, would somehow play the role of the regulator too. This was a major lacuna in the law.
This has finally changed. The CCPA has the power to investigate into unsafe goods, order their recall and direct refund of the cost of such goods to the consumers; it can put stop to all unfair trade practices, including unfair terms in consumer contracts and false and misleading advertisements. It can also hold celebrity endorsers liable for false and misleading promotions. It can also take to task, those selling and manufacturing adulterated and spurious goods. And the punishment prescribed under the law for some of these offences is stringent. However, it may take some time for the Authority to become fully functional.
But the consumer courts have already moved over to the new law. While the old cases will continue to be adjudicated under the old law, the new ones will have to be filed under the CP Act of 2019, which means that consumers have to keep in mind the changed pecuniary jurisdiction of these Commissions. The consumer court at the district level or the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, has the jurisdiction to entertain complaints up to the value of Rs 1 crore. Those above Rs 1 crore and upto Rs 10 crore will be handled by the State Commission and complaints above Rs 10 crore will go the National Commission
However, the biggest advantage to the consumer under the new law is that (a) you can file the complaint online, sitting in the comfort of your home and b) the choice of the court no more depends on where the opposite party resides or has an office. You can choose a consumer court close to your home or place of work. 
However, there is no substantial change in the procedure before these courts –so the lawyers will be there and so also the adjournments, unless the government finds ways and means of strictly enforcing the 90-day limit for completing the adjudication, as prescribed under the old and now the new law. However, if you do not want a long fight, you can opt for mediation for quick settlement of your dispute. 
Thus while the 1986 law laid the foundation for consumer protection in the country, the 2019 Act builds on it, brick by brick. On its strict enforcement rests consumer empowerment.
